Sky130 Technology Library
=========================
Hammer supports the Skywater 130nm Technology process. The [SkyWater Open Source PDK](https://skywater-pdk.readthedocs.io/) is a collaboration between Google and SkyWater Technology Foundry to provide a fully open source Process Design Kit (PDK) and related resources, which can be used to create manufacturable designs at SkyWater’s facility.


PDK Setup
---------

The Skywater 130nm PDK files are located in a repo called [skywater-pdk](https://github.com/google/skywater-pdk/). A tool called [Open-PDKs (open_pdks)](https://github.com/RTimothyEdwards/open_pdks/) was developed to generate all the files typically found in a PDK.
Open-PDKs uses the contents in `skywater-pdk`, and outputs files to a directory called `sky130A`.

# TODO(elamdf) bring back manual pdk docs
### PDK Install

```shell
conda install -c litex-hub open_pdks.sky130a
```

We recommend using the conda install, but the [manual PDK setup is documented below](#manual-pdk-setup) (although it may be outdated).

Now in your Hammer YAML configs, point to the location of this install:

```yaml
technology.sky130.sky130A: "<PREFIX>/share/pdk/sky130A"
```

### Cadence PDK

Cadence has also created a PDK and standard cell library based on the original open PDK, and optimized for use with Cadence tools. Usage of this PDK is purely optional, but enables DRC/LVS with Pegasus, and IR drop analysis with Voltus.

You can download them from [here](https://support.cadence.com/apex/ArticleAttachmentPortal?id=a1Od000000051TqEAI&pageName=ArticleContent) (Cadence Support account is required). After downloading and untar-ing the packages, point to the location of this install:

```yaml
technology.sky130.sky130_cds: "<path/to/sky130_pdk>"
technology.sky130.sky130_scl: "<path/to/sky130_scl>"
```

To select this standard cell library (instead of the default `sky130_fd_sc_hd`):

```yaml
technology.sky130.stdcell_library: "sky130_scl"
```

SRAM Macros
-----------

If you are using SRAMs in your design, such as for the [Chipyard Sky130 tutorial](https://chipyard.readthedocs.io/en/stable/VLSI/Sky130-Commercial-Tutorial.html),
you will require a set of SRAM macros.
The Sky130 PDK did not come with it's own SRAM macros, so these have been generated by various third-party contributors.
Hammer is compatible with Sky130 SRAM macros generated by 
[Sram22](https://github.com/rahulk29/sram22_sky130_macros)
and [OpenRAM](https://github.com/efabless/sky130_sram_macros),
but starting with Hammer v1.0.2 only Sram22 macros will be supported.
To obtain these macros, clone their github repo:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/rahulk29/sram22_sky130_macros
```

Then set the respective Hammer YAML key:

```yaml
technology.sky130.sram22_sky130_macros: "/path/to/sram22_sky130_macros"
```

Note that the various configurations of the SRAMs available are encoded in the file ``sram-cache.json``.
To modify this file to include different configurations, or switch to using the OpenRAM SRAMs,
navigate to ``./extra/[sram22|openram]`` and run the script ``./sram-cache-gen.py`` for usage information.

IO Library
----------

The IO ring required by efabless for MPW/ChipIgnite can be created in Innovus using the `sky130_fd_io` and `sky130_ef_io `IO cell libraries. Here are the steps to use them:

1. `extra/efabless_template.io` is a template IO file. You should modify this by replacing the `<inst_path>`s with the netlist paths to your GPIO & analog pads. **DO NOT MODIFY ANY POSITIONS OR REPLACE CLAMP CELLS WITH IO CELLS**.

    a. For pad assignment: the ordering in the instance lists are from left to right (for top/bottom edges) and **bottom to top (for left/right edges)**.

    b. Refer to [this documentation](https://skywater-pdk.readthedocs.io/en/main/contents/libraries/sky130_fd_io/docs/user_guide.html) for how to configure the pins of the IO cells (not exhaustive).

    c. Your chip reset signal must go thru the `xres4v2` cell. Since this is in your netlist, you must remove the `cell=...` instantiation from your IO file (it is only in the template for clarity) and update the inst name. Otherwise a separate instance will be placed instead.

    d. The `ENABLE_INP_H` pin must be hard-tied to `TIE_HI_ESD` or `TIE_LO_ESD`. Since this is at a higher voltage, verify that this is routed as a wire only (no buffers can be inserted).

    e. `ENABLE_H` must be low at chip startup before going high. Absent using the power detector cell from the NDA IO library, you may elect to connect this to a reset signal.

    f. This template file does not contain dedicated clamps for the `VSWITCH` or `VCCHIB` supplies (following Caravel). EFabless provides a `sky130_ef_io__connect_vcchib_vccd_and_vswitch_vddio_slice_20um` slice in `open_pdks` that replaces a standard 20um spacer with a slice that connects `VCCHIB` and `VCCD` together, and `VSWITCH` and `VDDIO` together. Note that this slice cannot be placed immediately to the right (in the R0 orientation) of a `*_clamped3_pad` cell, because otherwise they *will* create a supply short. The template IO file contains normal 20um spacer slices explicitly placed at these critical locations, and the provided hook instantiates the `connect` slice in place of the standard 20um spacer. This can be modified if desired. Caravel distributes the `*connect*` slices across the bottom edge of the padframe.

2. Then, in your design YAML file, specify your IO file with the following. The top-level constraint must be exactly as below:

    ```yaml
    technology.sky130.io_file: <path/to/ring.io>
    technology.sky130.io_file_meta: prependlocal

    path: Top
    type: toplevel
    x: 0
    y: 0
    width: 3588
    height: 5188
    margins:
      left: 249.78
      right: 249.78
      top: 252.08
      bottom: 252.08
    ```

3. In your CLIDriver, you must import the following hook from the tech plugin and insert it as a `post_insertion_hook` after `floorplan_design`.

    ```python
    from hammer.technology.sky130 import efabless_ring_io
    ```

    In addition, to ensure ties to `TIE_HI_ESD` / `TIE_LO_ESD` are preserved during synthesis, a `post_insertion_hook` to `init_environment` should be added to `dont_touch` the IO cells

    ```python
    def donttouch_iocells(x: HammerTool) -> bool:
        x.append('set_dont_touch [get_db insts -if {.base_cell.name == sky130_ef_io__*}] true')
        return True
    ```

4. If you want to use the NDA s8iom0s8 library, you must include the `s8io.yml` file with `-p` on the `hammer-vlsi` command line, and then change the cells to that library in the IO file. Net names in the hook above will need to be lower-cased.

5. DRC requires a rectangle of `areaid.lowTapDensity` (GDS layer 81/14) around the core area to check latchup correctly. Currently, this is not yet implemented in Hammer, and will need to be added manually in a GDS editor after GDS streamout.

NDA Files
---------
The NDA version of the Sky130 PDK is only required for Siemens Calibre to perform DRC/LVS signoff with the commercial VLSI flow.
It is NOT REQUIRED for the remaining commercial flow, as well as the open-source tool flow.
Therefore this NDA PDK is not used to generate a GDS.

If you have access to the NDA repo, you should add this path to your Hammer YAML configs:

```yaml
technology.sky130.sky130_nda: "/path/to/skywater-src-nda"
```

We use the Calibre decks in the ``s8`` PDK, version ``V2.0.1``, 
see [here for the DRC deck path](https://github.com/ucb-bar/hammer/blob/612b4b662a774b1cab5cf25e8f41c6a771388e47/hammer/technology/sky130/sky130.tech.json#L16) 
and [here for the LVS deck path](https://github.com/ucb-bar/hammer/blob/612b4b662a774b1cab5cf25e8f41c6a771388e47/hammer/technology/sky130/sky130.tech.json#L24).

### Sky130 s8io Library

The IO ring expected by efabless for MPW/ChipIgnite can be created in Innovus using the NDA s8iom0s8 IO cell library. Here are the steps to use it:

1. `extra/efabless_template.io` is a template IO file. You should modify this by replacing the `<inst_path>`s with the paths to the IO cell instances in your netlist. **DO NOT MODIFY THE POSITIONS OF THE CELLS OR REPLACE CLAMP CELLS WITH IO CELLS**

    a. The ordering in the instance lists are from left to right (for top/bottom edges) and **bottom to top (for left/right edges)**. 

    b. Refer [this documentation](https://skywater-pdk.readthedocs.io/en/main/contents/libraries/sky130_fd_io/docs/user_guide.html) for how to configure the pins of the GPIOs (not exhaustive).

    c. By default, the `s8iom0s8_top_gpiov2` cell has a `tie_hi_esd` pin that must be tied to VDDIO, which is difficult to do in Innovus. It is suggested to make a custom version of this with that pin tied to VDDIO, export the GDS, and hack the CDL/GDS/LEF for that cell only, then add is separately as an extra library.

2. Then, in your design YAML file, specify your IO file with the following. The top-level constraint must be exactly as below:

        technology.sky130.io_file: <path/to/ring.io>
        technology.sky130.io_file_meta: prependlocal

        path: Top
        type: toplevel
        x: 0
        y: 0
        width: 3588
        height: 5188
        margins:
          left: 200.1
          right: 200.1
          top: 201.28
          bottom: 201.28

3. In your CLIDriver, you must import the following hook from the tech plugin and insert it as a `post_insertion_hook` after `floorplan_design`.

        from hammer.technology.sky130 import efabless_ring_io

4. Finally, in order to get the libraries into your flow, you must include the `s8io.yml` file with `-p` on the `hammer-vlsi` command line.

Resources
---------
The good thing about this process being open-source is that most questions about the process are answerable through a google search. 
The tradeoff is that the documentation is a bit of a mess, and is currently scattered over a few pages and Github repos. 
We try to summarize these below.

SRAMs:

* [Sram22 pre-compiled macros](https://github.com/rahulk29/sram22_sky130_macros)

  * Various pre-compiled sizes of SRAM macros to support Hammer Sky130 flow

* [Sram22](https://github.com/rahulk29/sram22)

  * Open-source SRAM generator
  * Currently only supports the Sky130 process
  * Very much under development, and some parts currently require commercial tools (for LEF and LIB generation)

* [OpenRAM pre-compiled macros](https://github.com/efabless/sky130_sram_macros)

  * Precompiled sizes are 1kbytes, 2kbytes and 4kbytes

* [OpenRAM](https://github.com/VLSIDA/OpenRAM/)

  * Open-source static random access memory (SRAM) compiler


Git repos:

* [SkyWater Open Source PDK](https://github.com/google/skywater-pdk/)

  * Git repo of the main Skywater 130nm files

* [Open-PDKs](https://github.com/RTimothyEdwards/open_pdks/)

  * Git repo of Open-PDKs tool that compiles the Sky130 PDK

* [Git repos on foss-eda-tools](https://foss-eda-tools.googlesource.com/)

  * Additional useful repos, such as Berkeley Analog Generator (BAG) setup

Documentation:

* [SkyWater SKY130 PDK's documentation](https://skywater-pdk.readthedocs.io)

  * Main documentation site for the PDK

* [Join the SkyWater PDK Slack Channel](https://join.skywater.tools/)

  * By far the best way to have questions about the process answered, with 80+ channels for different topics

* [Skywater130 Standard Cell and Primitives Overview](http://diychip.org/sky130/)

  * Additional useful documentation for the PDK


## Manual PDK Setup

### PDK Structure

OpenLANE expects a certain file structure for the Sky130 PDK. 
We recommend adhering to this file structure for Hammer as well.
All the files reside in a root folder (named something like `skywater` or `sky130`).
The environment variable `$PDK_ROOT` should be set to this folder's path:

```shell
export PDK_ROOT=<path-to-skywater-directory>
```

`$PDK_ROOT` contains the following:

* `skywater-pdk`

  * Original PDK source files

* `open_pdks`

  * install of Open-PDKs tool

* `share/pdk/sky130A`

  * output files from Open-PDKs compilation process


### Prerequisites for PDK Setup

* [Magic](http://opencircuitdesign.com/magic/)

  * required for `open_pdks` file generation
  * tricky to install, closely follow the directions on the `Install` page of the website
  
    * as the directions indicate, you will likely need to manually specify the location of the Tcl/Tk package installation using `--with-tcl` and `--with-tk`
 
 If using conda, these installs alone caused the Magic install to work:

```shell
conda install -c intel tcl 
conda install -c anaconda tk 
conda install -c anaconda libglu
```

### PDK Install

In `$PDK_ROOT`, clone the skywater-pdk repo and generate the liberty files for each library:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/google/skywater-pdk.git
cd skywater-pdk
# Expect a large download! ~7GB at time of writing.
git submodule init libraries/*/latest
git submodule update
# Regenerate liberty files
make timing
```

Again in `$PDK_ROOT`, clone the open_pdks repo and run the install process to generate the `sky130A` directory:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/RTimothyEdwards/open_pdks.git
cd open_pdks
./configure \
    --enable-sky130-pdk=$PDK_ROOT/skywater-pdk/libraries \
    --prefix=$PDK_ROOT \
make
make install
```

This generates all the Sky130 PDK files and installs them to `$PDK_ROOT/share/pdk/sky130A`

